We're on side three.
Say that again.
Something left into somebody's hands.
All of the books that Carter wanted left into his hands in a fantastically short period of time.
He got William Carlos Williams' first book from me.
It's been the only copy.
He got numerous books, the only one copy, and there are many in modern literature.
He got a staggering number of wonderful books.
And the only penalty he had to pay is that he might have been expected to buy one each of books that were not rare, but he certainly got good copies of those books, and he didn't necessarily pay too much for them.
So he was extraordinarily well served.
Is the Carter Britton phenomenon a unique phenomenon in your experience?
It is in modern literature.
It is unique in my experience.
is that people with money in that quantity to spend, and mind you, say he spent $20 million, and I don't think it... It's an absurdly small amount of money, given the amount of money out in the world, and who has it?
Book people don't ever, aren't ever... Book people of my acquaintance are not usually in that framework of sales.
I can remember...
Jake Zeitlin smugly saying not long before he died that he had just sold to the Getty the collection of illuminated manuscripts for 40-some million dollars, and it was the largest... Can I just interrupt here?
This is very important to me.
I understand that they needed Zeitlin to sell that to Getty.
Kroos tried to sell it.
Was Kroos involved in that?
Yes, yes, yes.
And he couldn't do it, but the only way he could do it was with Jake.
I'm sure that that's true.
It's simple, you know, certain... We can get Mel Ehlstein to tell me a bit.
Well, no, it's probably a proper, and I'm not sure to what degree Mel was involved.
He won't talk about acquisitions.
Right, he shouldn't.
It's a proper thing, and I don't know a thing about it, but I know how things work, and things work on the force of personal relationships, and Zeitlin was nothing if not a man who created personal relationships and unquestionably had a personal relationship with
someone seriously representing Getty.
So what's the dynamic here?
Why couldn't Krauss do it with Getty?
Because Krauss is almost surely not universally loved.
What's that got to do with chess, as Bobby Fischer would say?
Well, because Zeitlin was universally loved by it.
I mean, they wanted the manuscripts, didn't they?
No, there are other things to buy in the world.
They're not primarily a book library, a book museum.
But those limited manuscripts did represent medieval art.
and the finest aspect of it.
It was a worthy acquisition, and they paid a big price.
But my point was that Zeitlin very smugly told the Denver Book Soldiers Convention that he had just that moment finished the deal, which was almost surely the largest book deal that will ever occur, forty-some million dollars.
And I thought, ho-hum, you know.
I mean, sure, it was a nice collection.
It was the greatest of its kind.
There won't be any more collections of ancient Luminati manuscripts changing hands at that level.
But, you know, who cares that there was $47 million?
I can spend $47 million usefully if I have $47 million to spend, and I'll come up with some wonderful things, and they won't be the same.
The hang-up with all bookselling is if you think you can sell the same book or the same item or replicate exactly what you've done before instead of
doing what you're really doing selling that which comes to hand most usefully to those who most want it no matter what it is so you can't of course continue to sell collections of illuminated medieval manuscripts but i didn't much care for the smugness that he was part and party to the biggest deal yet then ever made
when the accident of the Getty having an embarrassment to spend 800 million dollars a year they have to spend doesn't ennoble Jake Zeitlin for being the intermediary in a book deal on the force of his personality but one can at least credit him with being the intermediary and of being trusted on both sides
And that's sort of the end of it.
I would hope that I was the intermediary in some transaction.
I'm always the intermediary in some transaction or other.
And the fact that it was a lot of money is really not very relevant.
Well, to go back to money, we're talking 47 million.
Yeah, big bucks, big bucks.
Yeah, the question... On a single... Right, right.
And some dealer makes a commission.
If you're determined to...
be on the level of transactions in which the numbers are large, then your commissions would be large.
And how you get there, you can either get there through breeding or birth or force of will, or you can ratchet your way up the ladder.
There are a few dealers, very few, but there are a few that have ratcheted up the ladder.
Heritage has ratcheted himself up and Glenn has ratcheted himself up as fast as possible.
And somebody like Colin Franklin was...
in style and temperament and mode and dress born to the role of doing things like that.
But we are not prevented from selling wonderful things to respected clients by whoever we are in general.
It may take Jake to be the connector in that instance, but I'm quite confident that in a T-shirt and overalls and
And with too many drinks in me, I could also be the worthy intermediary between A and B with any kind of material.
So there is no, the book business cuts away with much of pretense and status.
And the goods usually speak for themselves, although not always.
We talked about one phenomenon.
Let's talk about another, haven or more.
But I know nothing about Haven O'Moore.
I'm not qualified to speak of him in any way.
I never sold him a book.
I never met him.
I don't know whose money he was spending or how much.
The catalog that was published was bizarre and uninteresting and a collection of high spots smashed out of the world over the years.
It's not very interesting to me because one, it doesn't
tend to touch me.
Obviously, each of the books is worthy in its way.
But what Haven of More's motivations were and what the profits were and what the goal in the first place was, I have no knowledge whatsoever.
I see things like that occurring.
They often occur through the force of one man's personality or the imposition of a personality on another or simply the love or the emotional need of acquiring in the book world
outstanding examples of books either themselves outstanding or interesting.
And it's often a function of the amount of available cash and relationships with the kinds of dealers who can acquire the kinds of books that said person is interested in.
These touch us from time to time.
Clearly I'm
interested in telling Richard Manning the kinds of things that are, as I imagined it, worthy of his attention, but which no one else but I can supply.
And it is difficult.
It is so difficult that one frequently wonders whether it's worth it, because one, in that instance, does not one feel trusted.
And worse, one isn't certain that the material is appreciated.
And yet, given where it comes from and who supplies it to me or with me, I don't doubt the material.
And therefore, I'm constantly questioning the degree to which I have to struggle to make available the material that I think is worthy of
Is Dick Manny a phenomenon or just an interesting player?
Unusual.
I mean, he collected antiques, collected art for six or seven years.
Well, I don't regard him as a phenomenon, no.
Interesting.
Interesting for a very, very few people.
Very few.
What do you mean?
Almost none.
In terms of... Manny is totally motivated by his own determination of what it is that he should collect.
I don't think he's fully defining it.
And he's in the process of defining it.
And one of the things that's nice about Manny is that he enjoys his wealth and he enjoys immensely the freedom that he has to choose what it is that he buys.
One of the negatives is that I believe by profession he is a negotiator.
By professional mediators.
Well, I understand.
I think he brokers, I mean, I'm not utterly privy to what he does, but he brokers media time to the networks for major advertisers.
And he has to negotiate at all times.
My guess is, though, one of the earliest times he met me, he told me that he had just sold a couple of vineyards in Southern California for somebody.
And certainly he wasn't buying it for himself.
So he had brokered the deal.
Consequently, the most characteristic aspect of our relationship is that he feels it necessary to negotiate my price with me, always.
And this is such a wearing and unnecessary aspect of our relationship.
that I am constantly wondering whether I need to endure this when my motivation, cheaply, is to better the financial health of my source, who, although the best book person in L.A., is penniless.
I mean, genuinely penniless.
Penniless.
His name is Brian Kirby.
He's the best book person in Los Angeles.
It is his current and consuming interest because he has only got
for one interest at the moment is screenplay.
He's the best screenplay person in the world.
I don't really want to publicize the degree to which Brian and screenplays are one-on-one because it can only do him harm in terms of the ability to acquire them.
But the fact is that he has come up with the most wonderful screenplay.
I've known Brian since six weeks after he moved to Los Angeles, almost 30 years.
He's always been instant screenplays.
He's one of the few people who read screenplays from beginning to end.
He's constantly reading them.
He knows everything about screenplays.
Can you guys talk to him?
Sure.
He's so utterly committed to screenplays.
The fascination of screenplays would take a long time to talk about.
You've written about this yourself.
Only minimally.
The fact is that they represent the single most largest aspect of unpublished writing by major writers.
Not to mention the fact that they're also involved with film, which you can talk about from the film aspect, but there's a huge body of unpublished and uncollected work by innumerable writers.
Brian turned up for me all of the Faulkner screenplays, I think it was for Warner Brothers at the time, or 20th Century Fox, that Virginia refused at $17,500, in which I sold to Howl, and which ended up with Brodsky for way over $100,000, in which Brodsky has turned into several books, and which was a
an unbelievable and irreplaceable trove of material that was nowhere else represented.
Consequently, I've had more screenplays by Faulkner than anybody could dream of, and no one else had had any.
Why didn't you try and sell this to Brodsky?
Why didn't you sell to Howell?
Why didn't you have gotten a hundred K out of that?
I didn't know Brodsky at the time, and Howell was my bookseller across the street, and was
faithful and sustaining to lesser and humbler and poorer booksellers, and believed in what I believed in.
I was happy with my profit at the time.
That's irrelevant.
Right.
I went to the best customer I could find at the time.
$60,000 was a lot of money.
So, with regard to Richard Manning,
He's a new player.
He's certainly a new player.
I watch him and... He has an attitude that I don't share, for which he has an elaborate rationale, and that is that he either enjoys and or is better off buying great books at auction because...
at auction, he's getting them at the right price, and he is disallowing anybody the possibility of a profit on him, of course, except for the owner, except for 5%.
Or no percent if he himself does the bidding.
Now, I happen to be partial to the book trade rather than to the auctionist, the conduit medium for
and all of these books prior to their having been at the auction were in the hands of booksellers.
I think Richard likes the approval of the price that arrived at arbitrarily and fairly, i.e.
to the book auction, whereas it is my responsibility and pleasure to try to sell Richard Manning things before they ever dreamed of getting to an auction, i.e.
ahead of the market, if you will.
on the basis of my private intelligence, enthusiasm, and source.
And he is not necessarily comfortable with that sequence.
Well, I think Krokes sold the four folios to Haven, though more, for $165,000, which went for $2 million.
And how long ago?
Not long.
Right.
But Richard is too much of a negotiator to not want to
impose his will on mine with regard to my price.
It is not the attitude of someone who has a lot of respect for the book trade.
And I have total respect for the book trade.
And consequently there's a tussle there.
And I am profoundly uncomfortable with it.
And it's my responsibility.
on behalf of my own welfare and certainly on behalf of my friend who needs the money to administer my end of this relationship as long as there's a relationship.
Let's move on.
Do you have any knowledge in all of this magic collection, the Mulholland thing, the guy that's saving the long guy or something?
Oh, I only... I don't know what's happened.
I only know Ricky Jay as a serious collector of magic and as a magician, and that he had a non-profit library going for acquisitions.
It's always a little weird when a single person gets a non-profit status for any purpose.
Maybe he's the curator of the Mulholland.
Yes, I know that, but what the Mulholland library is is what I don't know.
And now it's been threatened with dissolution for financial reasons,
Or because whoever was the primary owner or donor, you know, is no longer sustaining it financially.
Well, he was a savings and loan guy.
I don't know anything about it.
Okay.
I've got that covered, no problem.
I don't know anything.
I only know of Ricky Jay by having him in front of my booth once every so often.
Nice guy.
Yeah.
And like there's a magic man on each coast buying...
religiously and faithfully buying books on magic, one in Canada, and the dealers are incredibly loyal to these worthy customers.
And the fact that there's a larger entity involved meddling or making possible the creation of something which then is dissolved is simply a phenomenon that will occur in any financial sequence that comes down the pike.
Libraries are built and libraries are dissolved, and some of the most important libraries are built and then, unbelievably to us, dissolved.
Whereas, in fact, you know, libraries from time immemorial have been dissolved over and over and over again.
So the fact that the Fort Summer Library is suddenly in Texas and...
As a matter of fact, Texas is not beginning to get closer to deacquisitioning duplicates, something that has never happened before.
They have duplicates?
No, they've known all along that they have duplicates, and they've had no legal way to dispose of them.
Well, the problem is it's a state.
Well, I know the problem, but the fact is that they have someone there who's beginning to solve the problem.
You're talking about Tom.
Yeah.
So...
There's a problem, you know, that's going to get solved.
Did you know Lou Feldman?
I knew him.
Can you tell me anything about him?
Not much.
Nobody liked Lou Feldman that I knew of.
I once sold him a Beckett collection, and then because I had sold him a Beckett collection and subsequently gotten Waiting for Godot, one of 30, and had gotten that book signed by the confluence of events, I felt it my moral obligation to sell him that book also.
even at cost, and I did that, and that was the last transaction we ever had, and I was not in any way involved with Feldman's supply in Texas.
I came in as he was dying, and he simply wasn't in my constellation or I in here.
Have you ever sold to Texas?
Certainly.
Any problems?
No, I mean, Lou never had an exclusive with Texas.
Lou was simply representing Texas at auction because he could financially carry Texas.
Well, I've talked to dealers like Ken Rendell, who said that Warren Robbers, for instance, would say, look, we don't have time for all the dealers.
Sell it to Lou Feldman, and we'll deal with Feldman.
I never was ever referred to Feldman.
There are many dealers who would have, you know, caused a tantrum.
I would never have done that.
Feldman was the main source.
I don't recollect ever having had any trouble selling Texas things that I thought were warranted.
I was a D.H.
Lawrence person, as was Roberts, and I sold a binding collection to Beckett Turner, and I've already sold some things to Tom Staley.
Texas, you know, was both in and out of, both directly and indirectly, may not have directly affected many dealers,
But if something was aimed at Texas and it got there indirectly, or worthy of Texas, got there indirectly, we were the beneficiaries of it.
But I had no trouble dealing with Texas directly.
I'm fully aware of the advantages of indirection in the book trade and frequently participate in them.
Everybody knows that I supply the University of California and Santa Cruz with Blake and Carlisle material of modest nature.
and so it's very unlikely that they would buy them from someone else, since they have a limited budget, and I do a lot of things with Santa Cruz.
So, but this kind of relationship is what makes the book business possible, and it happens either in ookensy-winksy degrees with places like Santa Cruz and myself, or it happens in economically monstrous and large situations, as with Roberts and Ransom in Texas and LDS.
I think...
Those will now be regarded as the dark ages in that responsible library administration would probably not allow one dealer to carry an enormous percentage of obligation and debt to the exclusion of other dealers, although that's the very phenomenon you see in Japan at the moment when every Japanese institution is represented by a
Very small number of Japanese people.
See, they did.
They said I was on credit from Feldman.
Well, they just didn't pay him.
They've admitted it.
But that's not a problem.
They didn't pay him until they were able to pay him.
But Cagle has been spending his budget ahead of time as long as I've known him, which is at least 20 years.
And if you have to wait six months or eight months, it's understood.
And that's simple.
That's simply an administration.
I'm not backing this.
I think Feldman was willing to do this.
Well, anybody would be willing to do it if they could afford to do it.
I'm sure that Feldman discounted it all at the bank.
Feldman was known to have personal assets via his wife.
He probably had a line of credit.
After 26 years, I have a line of credit of, I don't know, almost $500,000 so that if it comes to the management of funds and my willingness to do so, if somebody wanted me to carry them at interest for
you know, a certain sum of money for a certain amount of time and he was good for it, I would be happy to do that.
Not a problem.
It's just, there's no question that in recent times, more booksellers are more adept at managing money.
And managing money only leads them into the awareness, something that I certainly didn't have and that none of the people that I know are
overly interested in getting to know more of, of leveraging their businesses slightly more than book businesses traditionally do, about which every other business in the United States or anywhere else in the world knows how to do inside and out, backwards and forwards, from time immemorial.
The book business is surely the least leveraged of all so-called businesses.
I'm sure that Heritage knows how to manipulate money.
And Glenn, and I know about lines of credit.
But the notion of a bookseller having a line of credit, my guess is that of the 500 and some members of the ABAA, not 75 operate their businesses utilizing
a serious line of credit in the way that I think all English dealers universally do.
They all have overdrafts.
They call them overdrafts in England.
I think I've never heard of an English dealer speak for an hour and not mention the size and extent of his overdraft, whereas in America it's a foreign concept.
So the management of money is...
It's probably, in this way, i.e.
booksellers thinking about their businesses as businesses, financial entities.
It's got to be, for the people that I know pretty well, i.e.
modern perception of yours principally, a relatively new phenomenon.
When I went to Heritage, or Novos, when I was on that way,
Lou was showing me around this remodeled car with a stained glass window of me and his brother.
Interesting place, I guess, and it's appropriate for the location.
He took me into one room, the collection development room, and he told me of a customer, and this is typical, he said, of the type of customer that he had, who that morning
and earlier morning that we could come in and say, well, I've been married for 21 years.
Here's a list of 21 authors.
And they gave him a code, 1L or 1H or something like that.
And build a collection of these 21 different authors and deliver them.
Price is no logic.
And I said, well, is this book collecting?
Or is this interior decoration?
I mean, what are we doing here?
And he said, you know what interior decorators make in Beverly Hills?
I mean, he was shameless on the point.
I mean, I guess I'm interested in
I use that as an opening statement.
Talk to me about this.
Well, that particular example, that doesn't happen to the rest of us, and so it's very hard to... But the joy in collecting is to go out and... Well, I don't prescribe...
There's nothing, I have no objection, I don't judge.
I'm talking about the person who comes to him with that commission.
All of us would welcome the commission.
I think some of us with shame, some of us comes without shame, but I don't think there's any question that it would give us all a great pleasure to go to our colleagues and say, I need the 1-H of Conrad in fine condition.
And so...
None of us are surprised that Lou will get such commissions, and none of us are happy to supply the books, because they'll be back on the market, and some people would not bother to supply them, and others would, and that's no difference from anything else.
The phenomenon itself, once you're healthy in any business, you tend to get healthier, so the fact that Heritage enjoys such easy business,
and profitable, terribly profitable businesses.
You know, nobody can begrudge them.
That's wholly in character with the way he's always run his business.
And the fact that loose cannon money is centered in L.A.
results in the necessity that you also... Loose cannon money.
Well, money that is so easily spent.
Marsha Carter said, new money is happier money.
He thinks that the action is out in the West Post on book action.
Well, Larry said that it was Germans coming to buy books off his shelf in Washington, no one else.
We, in Berkeley, don't necessarily enjoy the phenomenon of seeing that money roll off the hand of the customer into our pockets in that way, and so I have never had
experiences like that, and yet I know that they occur all the time.
No one has ever told me, you know, go get it.
Price is no object.
And get it in this, usually the item for which they want you to get price is no object is not easily gettable at any price.
Sometimes it's pretty gettable, isn't it?
Well, of course.
The office he named were... It used to be called the carriage trade business, and you have to live where the carriage trade lives in order to have that business.
And it enables Louie to support a vast number of relatives.
And the way he runs it, he's certainly the most successful book dealer in the United States, I think.
I asked him what his gross was.
What do you think he said?
Let me answer that question.
I'll tell you what I think he said.
I think he said...
But the reason I bring it up is if I want to use it.
It's interesting because I think he said... And I challenged what he said, too.
Between $10 and $28 million a year.
I said $5 million.
$5 million a year.
And I said that's impossible.
I'm surprised.
Well, it's always said $5 million.
My gross last year was $1.6 million.
And after five months of this year, my gross was $1.6 million.
Although some people think it's realistic, but I have to believe it.
You think it's more?
I think it's more.
No, I mean... It's not a lot of money.
I mean, really.
Oh, well, you're dead wrong there.
Really?
Absolutely.
The guy's got a little voice in the parking lot there.
You don't understand.
Okay, I don't.
Yeah, you don't.
I mean, you don't understand.
You just don't understand.
At one point, he picked up a customer named Alan Fox.
and Alan Fox wanted to buy, I think, textbooks and other things.
And whatever the deal was, the deal was this, and Mark Twain.
And I'm not privy to this deal, but Ron always reads these things from outside.
The deal would be that they would walk around, and Lou would get him the best price possible, and he'd get a commission, 10%, 20%, probably 20%.
Alan Fox spent two and a
$3 million in a very short period of time.
Very short.
Alan Fox is a real estate person.
L.A.?
Yes.
Alan, A-L-O-E-N?
And in exchange for these services, he helped Lou learn a bit of the real estate business and recommended properties to him.
I believe it began with a single collection, the Unger sale.
Lou got the Unger books from the widow Unger in New Jersey.
He got them for, let's call it $50,000 or so.
Other people were competing for the books.
Lou is very skilled to question.
And he sold them to Maurice F. Neville just as Maurice was entering the book business with a seven inherited million dollar.
for, I believe, $175,000.
In cash or otherwise.
He made a very quick $100,000 profit quite a way back.
And about this time, he met Alan Fox, who taught him the real estate business.
And he almost surely taught him how to leverage real estate.
And without a doubt, Lou Weinstein took profits
and invested them in real estate, principally apartment houses in Los Angeles.
It's a hotel in New York.
And a ground rent in a hotel in New York.
And I'm absolutely certain that Lou's income, that Lou is worth many millions on the basis of his real estate, which in turn guarantees and finances a leverage book business.
complicated by very strong relationships with the Japanese, to which he has been pumping vast quantities of books, I believe, at ever higher levels, together with an amalgamation of resources, assets, intelligence, and muscle, with David Brass of E. Joseph in London, a similarly financed person,
together probably with a lesser relationship with Jim Cummins, who's a gentler person than these other two, and a better book person, but principally with David Brass.
So that Heritage and David Brass, E. Joseph, and Heritage, as partners in innumerable deals with Japan as a major
customer with the carriage trade in both cities as major cash flow providers are extremely powerful aggressive booksellers moving back and forth and here and there a large quantity of known books known for their reliability known for their market value known for their fixed price
known for their lasting desirability, and so they broker vast quantities of books.
But the fact is that they don't affect other booksellers' lives necessarily, either negatively or positively.
They, as often as not, call me up for a given book, and I almost never have it.
If they're asking for specific books, I will quote them because I know that they're serious.
They have customers.
They're not frivolous.
They're not looking for bargains.
They're out there.
They need the books.
They have customers.
These guys have customers, either implied or real.
And having customers is not the norm in the book.
Having customers is not the norm.
But if you are well-capitalized, bright, experienced, and are in major world capitals, and I've also gone to explore ahead of other people, as Lou did in Japan, new markets, then you have every factor that guarantees success and increased success.
So that when the greatest books begin to show up more and more at
at places where the margins are thinner and thinner, namely at auction, the people most likely to acquire them are people like E. Joseph and David Bratt.
And so they do.
And if you check it out, so they have.
The miracle is that Gary and Franny can sell 400,000 and you don't hear the phone ringing.
And then I can sell $1.6 million, which turns into like $5,000 a day, when I can easily remember looking for my first $100 sale, easily remember it.
And if you get my financial history printout, you know, I made 3 or 4% of my gross as net profit year after year after year, and it was 15 years before I made $16,000, and so on.
financial growth and success of booksellers wildly varies.
But there are only a couple people like Heritage and Horowitz and there's only one of me.
And Gary and Franny in financial terms are way, way, way ahead of all the rest of the world combined.
And then there's the great...
Massive booksellers in my revere are out there working away, doing the best they can, not necessarily motivated by money or whatever, enjoying modest livings.
Heritage is an extraordinary example of a successful businessman who happens to be in books.
You have somebody like Priscilla Duvelis who works out of her apartment because you know Priscilla in Boston.
Sure.
She doesn't have an open shop, you know.
Right.
Priscilla has access to money.
Access to cash and deals in certain kinds of things that are expensive.
How many of them at any one time with however many people is her affair.
I have 300,000 books.
And I know them all.
I mean, more or less.
The niece of the man up in Portland.
Do you think I could give her a call?
There would be no point in that.
That would be a mistake.
Go talk to Charlie Selyazicki about Fred.
Okay.
Selyazicki you should talk to.
Bob is hard to get a hold of.
Selyazicki was a close friend of Fred's.
He was a beneficiary of the library.
He was a bookseller.
He's a wonderful, gentle book.
3733 Northeast 24th.
Portland?
Northeast.
Got you.
3733 24th.
3723.
3733.
And what's the name of the store?
Charles Saucicchi.
He uses his name.
That's a tough one.
And then you were going to tell me something about Toby Holtzman.
Toby Holtzman was a guy who cared, is a guy who cared.
H-O-L-T-Z-M-A-N?
Yes.
New Yorker, California?
His home is in Grosse Pointe Farm, Michigan, and he is a builder.
The firm is
The business is pretty much in his son's hands now.
The firm is Holtzman and Silberman.
They're builders of dwellings, thousands of units.
Silberman is the biggest collector in the world of fluxus art, as it happens, fluxus art.
Holtzman, I don't know how it ever got started.
His father was a builder.
His father started the firm.
He's clearly a millionaire, multimillionaire, very successful.
His sons are even more aggressive than me, and he's plenty aggressive.
He's very wise.
But for some reason, he cared about books.
He collected American writers who were born after he was born and poets he met.
And he collected, he attempted to buy the books.
He had much in common with Fred Jacobson in a way, but he was controlled more by principle than by commitment to the text of the individual book.
He believed in a nation's writing.
He believed in collecting the first edition and every important edition.
He believed in collecting a token letter or manuscript.
He believed in collecting contributions to books and contributions to periodicals.
He believed that the whole was more than the individual sum of the parts.
He believed that an author's work was more important than a single author's important book.
He believed in collecting a fine condition.
He believed in buying the books new when they were published.
He collected known authors.
And he was systematic.
He did not believe in paying too much for a book.
He did not believe in going back and getting something that he missed at a
significantly higher price.
But he did believe in getting them when they came out, and he clipped PW.
He read PW.
He's the only book collector I ever know that read PW.
He clipped PW.
He would pay any sum of money to travel around the world to get the books, but he wouldn't then pay too much for the book.
He was on the committee for the book.
He is a volunteer to the committee on the book in the Library of Congress.
a religious Faulkner collector.
He would constantly go down to the Faulkner conference.
He was mobile, an essential element in the book.
Well, mobility is so much more important than money.
It's just unpeakable.
Single intelligence and then mobility.
And Toby collected maybe 200 American prose writers, and then one day he sold them.
It's all in the mean.
Can you explain why he used that?
I am interested in the author of Houghton Syndrome.
He lost interest when the authors died, and he moved them up.
He actually physically moved them across the room when they died.
They filled his house.
I think, one, he finished collecting all the authors.
As he grew older, his authors grew older, they stopped.
He had less enthusiasm for the younger authors.
To what degree Toby read is unclear to me.
What he did do was to see stage plays.
He would see every stage play in New York.
He'd watch the blind stage plays.
So he'd collect the drama as well, something that many people don't collect.
People, they all collect prose, and then to what extent they collect drama and poetry.
As print books or as manuscript?
No, no, not manuscript.
Nobody collects them.
Well, Carter Burden claims to have 50 unpublished Tennessee Williams items.
Well, that's easily done.
They could be... Well, they would be play scripts.
They'd be what I specialize in, scripts.
Mimeograph scripts of things that were not published, just like film scripts are not published.
So I can understand that.
Probably many of them came from me.
I mean, I supplied it with Tennessee Williams' first play, written in college, 1933.
Tennessee Williams, to me, is...
Well, you should see me.
I am suddenly rich with, I have lots of tons of land.
I have serious, what?
I think I have all of them.
No, you don't.
I don't?
No.
What don't I have?
I don't know which I have.
I'll send you a list of what exists and then you can tell me what you don't have.
You don't believe me, though.
Toby started collecting two other things.
He started collecting Soviet literature and Pasternak.
And he started going to Russia.
I said, wonderful.
And he has only recently imported a person to Stanford for an exhibit and paid all his expenses, bought him clothes because his suitcase didn't arrive to work.
And in exchange, he's gotten from this person some inscribed Isaac Babel.
So he's collecting there.
He's collecting Soviet literature in English and some in Russian.
And in this regard, he's... And it is Soviet, it's not just... Soviet.
Soviet.
There are four people he collects pre-Soviet.
It was centered in Pasternak, and he has a fine Pasternak collection.
I have gotten him some wonderful Pasternak, and I don't read a word of Russian, but I have gotten him some great Pasternak.
Truly great.
And... Truly great meeting manuscripts, that kind of thing.
One Samusat book of poems, yes.
And some inscribed Pasternak.
Lots of inscribed Pasternak.
And he's gotten a lot on his own.
But, because he believes that the way that, you know, cultures are best represented in their literature, that was his attitude toward American literature, and he believes in these, he's taken his Faulkner collection to Moscow, or a part of it, and exhibited it, and done a catalog of Sholokov and Passamak in parallel sequence to show, you know, the... Did he track anything?
Oh, sure.
But, I'd give you all these things.
But what he has really done,
toby's a jew he's a clearly a jew what he's his great collection greater than his american books were disseminated i bought them all i still have many of them but you know why did he say why he was dissolving indifference no not indifference no give them a new life something like that it's just that you know he had done what he wanted to do with them and they had done for him what he needed and toby is a practical and a realist and and he
And he knew that they were not unique beyond the belief.
And he didn't allow his emotions to be inside those book covers.
He's a more independent, stronger man.
That's the wrong word.
He's not dependent on the books.
Is his name actually Toby?
Erwin T. Holtzman.
But what Toby really did, this experience of collecting American authors, which wasn't so hard,
enabled him to get another vision.
And he started collecting Israelis' authors, Israel's authors.
And he has collected all of Israel's authors in all of their languages, five languages, and plus all of their manuscripts, as best he can do.
He has gone to Israel numerous times.
He's patronized numerous Israeli authors, genuinely patronized them.
You mean in a classic sense?
Yes.
And he has built
tucked away in Crows Point Farms, Michigan, what I believe to be the greatest collection of Israel's literature in the world, better than in Israel.
And it's his intention to give it to Israel.
I've got to talk to him.
This is the thrust of my book.
It is his intention to give it to Israel, I believe.
That one will stay together.
Even if it doesn't go to Israel.
It might go to Stanford.
He just exhibited his passion acts at Stanford.
And Sanford was, you know, Toby is willing to spend money on everything but the individual book.
He won't pay too much for the book, but he'll fly a Russian in with some books in his pockets.
He will fly to Russia.
He'll go to Israel.
And mind you, he doesn't go second class.
So in terms, he has a stupendous,
collection of Israeli literature in all languages, and only have two dealers and himself doing it.
And it is the idea of it which is compelling to Toby.
He is absolutely convinced that the preservation of a literature in its entirety together in the unit, he gave his Faulkner collection to Michigan, minus the top 15 items.
15?
15.
Why?
Why 15?
The economics of it.
I was involved in that.
But his terms to Michigan were that they must be kept physically together.
Now, no library will accept those terms, but Michigan did.
Well, it's in its own room somewhere.
It's in its own room.
His terms were that it stayed together, so it stayed together.
minus its top 15 items, which I sold for them.
Most libraries cannot keep books together that way.
That's not the way libraries work.
Some of them will do it.
No, some of them will not do it.
You're wrong.
They won't do it.
But Michigan did do it.
So they got the books.
He tried to give them to the Library of Congress.
I mean, he didn't get any response.
He couldn't give them to the Library of Congress on those terms.
Well, they kept the Rosenwald collection together, didn't they?
Then Toby, but you don't see the problems are multiple.
Toby then has said to me, I will buy any critical book from Peterson's collection and give it to Michigan.
I'll give them any one they don't have.
So I said, fine.
I wrote Michigan, sent them the catalog saying, please indicate which critical books you don't have so that Toby Holson can buy and give them to you.
Right?
No response.
Jesus Christ.
Are they crazy?
No response.
What's wrong with them?
You've got to understand that it costs the library money to give them a book.
Twenty dollars.
You give them a thousand books, it costs them twenty thousand dollars.
You're not doing them any favors.
Somebody said this to me before.
Simply processing them, acquisition them, cataloging them.
It costs twenty dollars a book.
It probably costs more.
You still had to... Did you pick up the phone and say... Well, they don't have a special collections librarian.
They don't have staff to search.
They don't have this, don't have that.
Who knows?
Do you believe that?
Sure.
The Clements Library?
Well, I don't know about the Clements Library.
They got people up to the other units.
Not necessarily.
The Ohio State is the designated library or self-designated library to collect
and to make possible a bibliography of American literature, American fiction, 1901, 1925.
There are already bibliographies of American fiction to 1900.
It's called Write One, Write Two, and Write Three, published by the Huntington.
They're classic checklists of American fiction from the beginning to 1900.
The next section is 1901, 1925.
Ohio State is the repository.
They have been funded.
administratively to continue the project.
I'm the single largest supplier.
I have organized the whole United States to collect fiction that Ohio State does not have.
There's some 20,000 to 30,000 volumes in this, potentially, and they have, I don't know how many, they have 13 or 14 or 15,000.
They think there's only plenty.
I think there's probably more.
What should I talk to in Ohio State?
Jeffrey Smith with a G. But, and I've sold
I sold Ohio State $50,000 worth of $20 books, $30 books in this period.
It's a lot of books in a very short period of time.
But at the present moment and for the immediate future, they do not have one dime for buying books in this field, although they have several hundreds of thousands of dollars for administrating the mechanics of it.
They don't have anything for acquisition.
This is often the case.
either either either they have money for acquisition and not for administration or they have money for uh administration not acquisition the university of texas could spend all its money into eternity for the preservation of that which it already has in terms of conservation and preservation or a substantial amount of it university california's budgets across the board were cut 12 percent the financial implications of collecting
I mean, I'm sure Carter was looking at the ultimate like, you know, there is no limit to how much money I can spend in 20th century books, and this is just 20th century books.
The least significant of all books, since, you know, other books being older and less accessible are more important because they're less available.
You can always get a 20th century book.
As Carter found out, he could get them all in 10 years.
He got them all.
William Crow Swings has them all.
Walker has them all.
And fine copies.
Name an author, has them all.
There are no gaps.
Has them all.
What do you do?
Well, then you go to minor and more and more and more minor writers.
But he was unwilling to go down to the level that in poetry one person has gone down to.
There is one dealer and one collector of American poetry who's buying one each of every book of American poetry, so long as it was a serious attempt at poetry, not a vanity book.
In other words, I am New York.
Oh, no, this is Henry Moore's nephew.
And the dealer is tucked away in Quilo, California.
He's well-known.
He's also buying an Australian... Who's the collector?
His name is Donowski.
D-A-N-O-W-S-P-Y.
Donowski.
He has one D-A-N-O-W-S-P-Y.
But the goal is one each of our old books of analysis.
It was always one each of English, American poetry, Australian poetry, Canadian poetry, i.e.
poetry in English language.
One each.
Down to the mimeograph.
What's the source of this practice as well?
Henry Moore.
Henry Moore, you said that.
And he's in California?
No.
That's right.
And I don't need it.
The point is that whereas Carter collected known American poets, known poets,
i.e.
ports that you would automatically find in every library.
This collector is collecting all of American ports.
Do you think it's reachable?
Are you going to get it?
He hasn't.
I mean, there's always more.
You see, the wonderful thing about books is that there is always more.
The other thing that happens is that one day he dies, it's all in boxes in the Swiss warehouse.
One day, should he die and the heirs not care?
the formulas for constructing a self-memorializing building and so on, if they're not completed or whatnot, poof, back in the market, you know, will be 200,000 volumes of poetry or a million volumes.
This guy was all in Switzerland?
Yeah.
Danowski lives in Switzerland.
Do you know Danowski's first name?
I'll be very discreet, don't worry about this.
I'm just curious.
But...
It's not in my head at the moment.
Okay.
These are only illustrations to a point, really, that, you know, where Carter stopped, actually, someone else was going on, and is still going on, and spending lots of money.
It's yet fathomable amounts of money.
So he spends a million a year or so, you know.
Nothing.
Right.
No, it's nothing.
It's nothing.
We're a bunch of pikers, and we control the culture, the physical...
representation of the culture of the world.
Listen, I'm going to Christie's Friday morning.
And they will spend more there than the modern precision books.
This binding collection, the Chevalier collection, you know.
I don't know, but that's all right.
Well, it's binding, you know.
I understand.
Content is irrelevant.
Right.
The money they're going to spend for these goddamn bindings is going to be staggering.
That's right.
Well, it's simply another art form.
It's not to be denied the moment you... But the point is, we've got about a million dollars for books.
in the grand scheme of things, it's no big deal.
Right.
The trick is that you don't want to spend $10,000 for a book, and it's Manny's Greatest Fear, that somebody tomorrow has for $4,000.
You know, in the piece I'm writing for the Times, I'm going to make it very clear that the whole Haber No More thing went for 16 mil, okay?
And this was 315 extraordinary high spots, all right?
The night before this sale, a Japanese
$22 million for a de Kumi, a living artist.
Right.
All of us are aware of the anomalies in this world, but the fact is that the moment you try to leap from one to the other, and this is only from personal experience, the only times in which you make the
leap, you try to be part of that world, when you're in this world, it doesn't really work.
Carter was, had collected paintings, of course, modern paintings, and he would, and he sold, had sold modern paintings, and he made, right, and he sells three modern paintings and enables him to collect, you know, a room full of books.
He made a vast profit on the paintings, he didn't make vast profit on the books, because
The rules of the game prevent him from making vast... And they're not really... So these kinds of activity are not really comparable.
Compared to the number of individual books that are sold, or the fact that they're printed in more than one copy, prevents any grandiose behavior in terms of dollars, generally speaking, until you get back to those things that do command serious amounts of money.
namely these illuminating manuscripts and great monuments or unique things and things that are unique and and interesting or beautiful and so on and and so but the fact is that uh you know first folios people can still own first folios uh they're getting harder to get quickly good ones but uh
But there are rarer books.
I mean, there are, of the thousand printed, there's, you know, 700 are accounted for, so that... The Revival is not a scarce book.
Well, to get one, it's a scarce book de facto, because you can't get one.
There's only one privately owned Gutenberg left, I believe, which would be Shinty's.
The fact is that you can't get one, so that makes it, from your point of view, a very scarce book.
But you can get books...
Well, I handle the Blickling homilies at Shaggy's Library, which is quite a kick.
Exceedingly snuff.
That's a scarce book.
Most of us, we ought not to have to endure pain and suffering when we come up with the modern equivalent of this kind of thing.
And yet, I mean, I just got through the offices of my good friend in Southern California.
William Faulkner's first
screen credit was a film of Turnabout and I have the script and it's the file copy of the studio and I have the story that Turnabout typed up by the studio for the purposes and it's for which he got his first film credit.
It's a wonderful author item and I'm going to get nothing but trouble when I try to sell it to Richard Manning.
Nothing but trouble.
Instead of getting nothing but thanks
I'm going to get nothing but trouble.
That goes with the territory.
But why are you going to offer it to him first then?
Because he has bought my other Faulkner screenplays.
Because he has systematically been willing to buy my other Faulkner screenplays.
And he deserves first refusal on it.